Nvidia: Partial rewrite to bring up to date with new developments (#1026)
hyprwm/hyprland-wiki: pages/Nvidia/_index.md

LTS kernel, ensure you install both `linux-headers` and `linux-lts-headers`.

## Further Installation

The following packages must also be installed to ensure a smooth experience with
the proprietary drivers.

1. `nvidia-utils`: The userspace graphics drivers. You need this for pretty much
   everything on your system, and we would not recommend running your computer
   without it. If you are also using the "multilib" or "lib32" packages for
   gaming, steam, wine, etc., then you also require `lib32-nvidia-utils`.
2. `egl-wayland` (`libnvidia-egl-wayland1` and `libnvidia-egl-gbm1` on Ubuntu):
   This is required in order to enable compatibility between the EGL API and the
   Wayland protocol. This should already be installed on most distros.

## early KMS, DRM kernel mode setting and fbdev

On distros using mkinitcpio, like Arch, edit `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`. In the
`MODULES` array and add the following module names:

```conf {filename="/etc/mkinitcpio.conf"}
MODULES=(... nvidia nvidia_modeset nvidia_uvm nvidia_drm ...)
```

You can then rebuild the initramfs with `sudo mkinitcpio -P`, and reboot.

The setup for KMS and fbdev is now done by default on all nvidia drivers after

> and including the 560 series. Please ensure you are using the latest driver

Reviewer: From what's written above, only 560.35.03-5 or newer does this.

Author: ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f59278df-e6d7-41e9-af17-7f6d60917d8a)

issue on my end. I will correct this

Author: resolved by correcting my misinformation :+1:

# Foreword

There is no _official_ Hyprland support for Nvidia hardware. However, many
people have had success with the instructions on this page. Please read

> everything in FULL before creating any bug reports.

Author: @vaxerski , what do we think about removing the "no official support" part?

> everything in FULL before creating any bug reports.

Reviewer 2: meh, I like my wording better. We do special handling for nvidia, just not our priority

> everything in FULL before creating any bug reports.

Author: cool, keeping your wording :+1:

There are three potential setups you can have with driver setup on Nvidia.

> 1. Entirely proprietary Nvidia drivers
> 2. Entirely proprietary Nvidia drivers, except with the open source kernel
>    modules
> 3. Nouveau open source drivers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Entirely proprietary Nvidia drivers, often referred to as "Proprietary Drivers"
2. Entirely proprietary Nvidia drivers, except with the open source kernel
   modules, referred to as "Open Drivers".
3. Nouveau open source drivers. A clean-room implementation of Nvidia drivers, referred to simply as "Nouveau", and not to be confused with the "Open Drivers".
```

newer, the open source kernel modules are **REQUIRED** when using the
proprietary Nvidia drivers.

{{< /callout >}}

According to
[Nvidia](https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/nvidia-transitions-fully-towards-open-source-gpu-kernel-modules/),
the open source kernel modules are also recommended to be used by the
architechtures Turing and Ampere. In short, this includes the 20xx series of
consumer cards and later, whilst also including the 16xx series of cards (1650,
1660, etc). Your mileage may vary, so please try both of them if your card is
supported by both of them.

If either of the proprietary Nvidia driver setups do not work properly on your
computer, the Nouveau driver might work fine. This will likely be the case for
[older cards](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA#Unsupported_drivers).

# Proprietary driver setup

On Arch Linux and other Arch-based distros, we would recommend using the dkms
variety of the kernel modules, as it will support all installed kernels on your
system. Refrain from using the default `nvidia` or `nvidia-open` kernel module
packages as these can exhibit issues like the initramfs not being rebuilt in

> certain cases. They will also only work for the **default `linux` kernel**.

Reviewer 3: this has not been my experience, when I've stuck with the standard `linux` kernel package, its been fine. It may be true if you kernel hop, however. It has the benefit of not needing a rebuild every time you upgrade.

Author: I wrote it like so because I wanted to avoid issues concerning other kernels. Most specifically zen kernel for example is one which many (including me when I was on Arch) did in fact use, and including 6 (nvidia, nvidia-lts, nvidia-open, nvidia-open-lts, nvidia-dkms, nvidia-open-dkms) different possible versions of the nvidia package which users could use just seemed quite convoluted to me.

I can find some way to include it nicely though, the whole "initramfs not being rebuilt" was there from the old page, I just rewrote it to fit. If it's no longer the case I am open to changing this section.

Reviewer 3: Yeah I don't think you need to leave that in. initramfs is being rebuilt every time in both arch and cachyos afaics, so they must have fixed that at some point.

when modeset is also enabled. Therefore we simply need to enable modeset.

To enable it, create and edit `/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia.conf`, and add this line
to the file:

```conf {filename="/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia.conf"}
options nvidia_drm modeset=1
```

If you're on Arch Linux, this step has already been done for you.

If you're on NixOS, it is also
[enabled by default](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/0196e5372b8b7a282cb3bbe5cbf446617141ce38/nixos/modules/hardware/video/nvidia.nix#L116)
on all driver versions after 535.

Early KMS will allow the Nvidia modules to load earlier into the boot sequence.
On distros using mkinitcpio, like Arch, you can enable it by editing
`/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`. In the `MODULES` array and add the following module
names:

```conf {filename="/etc/mkinitcpio.conf"}
MODULES=(... nvidia nvidia_modeset nvidia_uvm nvidia_drm ...)
```

You can then rebuild the initramfs with `sudo mkinitcpio -P`, and reboot.

After rebooting, you can verify that DRM is actually enabled by running
`cat /sys/module/nvidia_drm/parameters/modeset` which should return `Y`.

More information is available
[here](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA#DRM_kernel_mode_setting).

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

# GSP Firmware

To quoth the Arch Wiki:

> The use of the [GSP firmware](https://download.nvidia.com/XFree86/Linux-x86_64/555.42.02/README/gsp.html), enabled by default since version 555 of the NVIDIA driver released in June 2024, is known to cause [a range of issues](https://bbs.archlinux.org/viewtopic.php?pid=2181317) including [Vulkan](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Vulkan) failures and system crashes.
>
> To disable it, use the NVreg_EnableGpuFirmware=0 [module parameter](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Module_parameter) for the nvidia kernel module. This only works with the proprietary NVIDIA driver: see [NVIDIA#Installation](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA#Installation) if switching from the open source driver.
> Do not forget to [regenerate the initramfs](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Regenerate_the_initramfs) if needed. To have this new kernel module option take effect, reboot.

```

Reviewer 3: its a specific thing that I've needed to do every time on my system. I think definitely though YMMV, which is probably why you might want it in a "last resort" section.

I do agree though you don't want the page to be a dumping ground of generic advice, but I'm definitely only speaking from my own experience running Hyprland.

Reviewer 3: as discussed, this is no longer a problem and is not necessary to do.

architechtures Turing and Ampere. In short, this includes the 20xx series of
consumer cards and later, whilst also including the 16xx series of cards (1650,
1660, etc). Your mileage may vary, so please try both of them if your card is
supported by both of them.

If either of the proprietary Nvidia driver setups do not work properly on your
computer, the Nouveau driver might work fine. This will likely be the case for
[older cards](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/NVIDIA#Unsupported_drivers).

# Proprietary driver setup

On Arch Linux and other Arch-based distros, we would recommend using the DKMS
variety of the kernel modules, as it will support all installed kernels on your
system.

If you are only using the `linux` or `linux-lts` kernels on your system, you can
also use the non-dkms packages if you wish.

For the entirely proprietary Nvidia drivers, you can therefore use the
`nvidia-dkms` package. And for those wanting / needing to use the open source
kernel modules, `nvidia-open-dkms` can be used.

These DKMS packages rely on having the "headers" package installed for your
kernels of choice. So please make sure you have all relevant headers packages

> installed on your system, for example, if you have the Zen kernel installed, you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
installed on your system. For example, if you have the Zen kernel installed, you
```

must ensure `linux-zen-headers` is also installed.

## Further Installation

The following packages must also be installed to ensure a smooth experience with
the proprietary drivers.

1. `nvidia-utils`: The userspace graphics drivers. You need this for pretty much

>    everything on your system, and we would not recommend running your computer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   everything on your system, and we do not recommend running your computer
```

   without it. If you are also using the "multilib" or "lib32" packages for

>    gaming, steam, wine, etc., then you also require `lib32-nvidia-utils`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   gaming, Steam, Wine, etc., then you also require `lib32-nvidia-utils`.
```

2. `egl-wayland` (`libnvidia-egl-wayland1` and `libnvidia-egl-gbm1` on Ubuntu):
   This is required in order to enable compatibility between the EGL API and the
   Wayland protocol. This should already be installed on most distros.

## Early KMS, modeset and fbdev

As of Nvidia driver version 570.86.16, fbdev has now been enabled by default
when modeset is also enabled. Therefore we simply need to enable modeset.

To enable it, create and edit `/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia.conf`, and add this line
to the file:

```conf {filename="/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia.conf"}
options nvidia_drm modeset=1
```

If you're on Arch Linux, this step has already been done for you.

If you're on NixOS, it is also
[enabled by default](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/0196e5372b8b7a282cb3bbe5cbf446617141ce38/nixos/modules/hardware/video/nvidia.nix#L116)
on all driver versions after 535.

Early KMS will allow the Nvidia modules to load earlier into the boot sequence.

> On distros using mkinitcpio, like Arch, you can enable it by editing
> `/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`. In the `MODULES` array and add the following module

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On distros using `mkinitcpio`, like Arch, you can enable it by editing
`/etc/mkinitcpio.conf`. In the `MODULES` array add the following module
```

## Finishing up

Install a few packages to get some apps to function natively with Wayland for
the best compatibility and performance. See
[the Master Tutorial](https://wiki.hyprland.org/Getting-Started/Master-Tutorial/#force-apps-to-use-wayland).

Reboot your computer.

Launch Hyprland.

It _should_ work now.

## Flickering in Electron / CEF apps

> The reason why Electron and CEF apps flicker is because of two reasons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Electron and CEF apps flicker because:
```

1. They run in XWayland by default.

> 2. They don't use the syncobj protocol by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. They don't use the `syncobj` protocol by default.
```

> To enable native Wayland support most Electron apps, you should be fine just
> adding this environment variable to your config:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable native Wayland support for most Electron apps, add this
environment variable to your config:
```

```

To do this easily for Spotify, Arch Linux has a `spotify-launcher` package in
their official repos. You should use that instead of the `spotify` package in
the AUR. Then, enable the Wayland backend in `/etc/spotify-launcher.conf` by
uncommenting this line:

```sh {filename="/etc/spotify-launcher.conf"}
extra_arguments = ["--enable-features=UseOzonePlatform", "--ozone-platform=wayland"]
```

For Arch Linux, some CEF / Electron apps may also have a respective flags file
in ~/.config. For example, for VSCodium, you can add the flags to
`~/.config/codium-flags.conf` and for Obsidian, you can add the flags to
`~/.config/obsidian/user-flags.conf`.

For NixOS, you can set the `NIXOS_OZONE_WL` environment variable to `1`, which
should automatically configure Electron / CEF apps to run with native Wayland
for you.

As of Electron 35 and Chromium 134, they now support the "syncobj" protocol
which implements explicit sync correctly. This resolves all flickering in
Electron apps, however it needs to be manually enabled. Adding the below flag to
any Electron / CEF apps should enable it:

```sh
--enable-features=WaylandLinuxDrmSyncobj
```

> Using this in conjunction with native Wayland on these apps should solve all

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In chromium based browsers, you can also enable it via `chrome://flags/#wayland-linux-drm-syncobj` 

Using this in conjunction with native Wayland on these apps should solve all
```

Author: I omitted this when writing since

- if you're modifying flags to make them run in native Wayland, why not add the syncobj flag there too
- the flag would work across both discord / vesktop / other clients and chromium-based browsers, instead of having the fix in one place on discord (and co.) and then in another place for the browsers
- more reproducible, not just for NixOS, but even for other distros you can just have one central place for flags instead of having them somewhere in your browser profile.

What do you think?

Reviewer 3: fair!

> Using this in conjunction with native Wayland on these apps should solve all
> issues.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using this in conjunction with native Wayland on these apps should solve all
issues.

## Typing issues in Discord, Chrome, Etc.

Even with Wayland enabled for some applications, and explicit sync working, there are sometimes issues for owners of 4090's, where typing can sometimes show previous frames as you type.

Some users have had luck disabling the GSP firmware as mentioned above, and disabling some of the power management cards, and this has been tested working with the 4090.

Add to `/etc/modprobe.d/nvidia.conf`

`options nvidia NVreg_RegistryDwords="PowerMizerEnable=0x1; PerfLevelSrc=0x2222; PowerMizerLevel=0x3; PowerMizerDefault=0x3; PowerMizerDefaultAC=0x3"`

```

I couldn't triple quote the above, so might look better if you do that.

Author: Alright, will add this since you've confirmed its still a potential fix to the issue. 

Just to confirm, you're sure that using electron 35, syncobj flag, and native wayland didn't solve it for you?

This has been confirmed to work on Vesktop, VSCodium, Obsidian and will probably
work on other Electron apps as well.

For other apps, including CEF apps, you will need to launch them with these
flags:

```sh
--enable-features=UseOzonePlatform --ozone-platform=wayland
```

> To do this easily for Spotify, Arch Linux has a `spotify-launcher` package in
> their official repos. You should use that instead of the `spotify` package in
> the AUR. Then, enable the Wayland backend in `/etc/spotify-launcher.conf` by
> uncommenting this line:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To do this easily for Spotify, Arch Linux has a `spotify-launcher` package in
their official repos. You should use that instead of the `spotify` package in
the AUR. Then, copy the `/etc/spotify-launcher.conf` file to `$HOME/.config/
and enable the Wayland backend in that file by uncommenting this line:
```

> ```sh {filename="/etc/spotify-launcher.conf"}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```sh {filename="$HOME/.config/spotify-launcher.conf"}
```

This has been confirmed to work on Vesktop, VSCodium, Obsidian and will probably
work on other Electron apps as well.

> For other apps, including CEF apps, you will need to launch them with these
> flags:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Other Electron or CEF apps have to be launched with these flags:
```

```sh
--enable-features=UseOzonePlatform --ozone-platform=wayland
```

> To do this easily for Spotify, Arch Linux has a `spotify-launcher` package in
> their official repos. You should use that instead of the `spotify` package in
> the AUR. Then, you can enable the Wayland flags by creating the file
> `~/.config/spotify-launcher.conf` with these contents:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Spotify, Arch Linux has a `spotify-launcher` package in their official
repos. Use that instead of the `spotify` package in the AUR. Afterwards,
enable the Wayland flags by creating the file
`~/.config/spotify-launcher.conf` with these contents:
```

```sh {filename="~/.config/spotify-launcher.conf"}
[spotify]
extra_arguments = ["--enable-features=UseOzonePlatform", "--ozone-platform=wayland"]
```

> For Arch Linux, some CEF / Electron apps may also have a respective flags file
> in ~/.config. For example, for VSCodium, you can add the flags to
> `~/.config/codium-flags.conf` and for Obsidian, you can add the flags to
> `~/.config/obsidian/user-flags.conf`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Arch Linux, some CEF / Electron apps may also have respective flags files
in `$XDG_CONFIG_HOME`. For example, VSCodium reads them from
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/codium-flags.conf` while Obsidian reads them from
`$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/obsidian/user-flags.conf`.
```

> For NixOS, you can set the `NIXOS_OZONE_WL` environment variable to `1`, which
> should automatically configure Electron / CEF apps to run with native Wayland
> for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On NixOS, you can set the environment variable `NIXOS_OZONE_WL=1`, which
automatically configures Electron / CEF apps to use Wayland.
```

As of Electron 35 and Chromium 134, they now support the "syncobj" protocol
which implements explicit sync correctly. This resolves all flickering in
Electron apps, however it needs to be _manually enabled_. Adding the below flag
to any Electron / CEF apps should enable it:

```sh
--enable-features=WaylandLinuxDrmSyncobj
```

Using this in conjunction with native Wayland on these apps should solve all
issues.

## VA-API hardware video acceleration

Hardware video acceleration on Nvidia and Wayland is possible with the
[nvidia-vaapi-driver](https://github.com/elFarto/nvidia-vaapi-driver). This may
solve specific issues in Electron apps.

> The install instructions are available in the README, however, a quick guide
> will be given here:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The install instructions are available in the README. However, a quick guide
will be given here:
```

1. Install the package. On Arch, this is `libva-nvidia-driver` in the official
   repos.

2. Add this variable to your Hyprland config:
   ```ini
   env = NVD_BACKEND,direct
   ```

   See
   [here](https://github.com/elFarto/nvidia-vaapi-driver?tab=readme-ov-file#upstream-regressions)
   for more information on this environment variable.

> You can check the README to get it working for Firefox. There is also
> experimental support for Chromium however there has not been much success.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check the README to get it working for Firefox. There is also
experimental support for Chromium, however there has not been much success.
```

## Other issues

### Multi-monitor with hybrid graphics

On a hybrid graphics device (a laptop with both an Intel and an Nvidia GPU), you
will need to remove the `optimus-manager` package if installed (disabling the
service does not work). You also need to change your BIOS settings from hybrid
graphics to discrete graphics.

### Flickering in XWayland games

XWayland games may flicker or present frames out-of-order in a way which makes
them unplayable. This is due to the lack of implicit synchronization in the
driver, and/or flaky explicit sync support in newer ones.

There are a few fixes:

1. Install the latest versions of `xorg-xwayland`, `wayland-protocols` and
   Nvidia driver. Ensure `xorg-xwayland` is at least version 24.1,
   `wayland-protocols` is at least version 1.34 and Nvidia driver is at least
   version 555. These enable explicit sync on the Nvidia driver and should avoid
   flickering.

> 2. If your GPU is no longer supported by the 555 or later drivers, install older
>    Nvidia drivers which do not exhibit this issue. The last ones which would
>    work will be the 535xx series of drivers. These can be installed on Arch via
>    [these AUR packages](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages?O=0&K=535xx)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If your GPU is no longer supported by the 555 or later drivers, install older
   Nvidia drivers which do not exhibit this issue. The last ones that work are
   the 535xx series of drivers. These can be installed on Arch via
   [these AUR packages](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages?O=0&K=535xx)
```

### Suspend/wakeup issues

> On Arch Linux and NixOS, the below is already done for you, but for others:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Arch Linux and NixOS, the instructions below are already done for you, but for others:
```

> - Enable the services `nvidia-suspend.service`, `nvidia-hibernate.service` and
>   `nvidia-resume.service`, they will be started by systemd when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Enable the services `nvidia-suspend.service`, `nvidia-hibernate.service` and
  `nvidia-resume.service`. They will be started by systemd when needed.
```

Add `nvidia.NVreg_PreserveVideoMemoryAllocations=1` to your kernel parameters if
you haven't already.

For Nix users, the equivalent of the above is

```nix {filename="configuration.nix"}
hardware.nvidia.powerManagement.enable = true;
```

{{< callout >}}

> According to Nvidia, suspend / wakeup issues should be solved on the Nvidia open
> drivers. If it still doesn't work and you're using the open drivers, it may be
> worth trying the proprietary ones, just in case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
According to Nvidia, suspend/wakeup issues should be solved on the Nvidia open
driver. If it still doesn't work and you're using the open driver, it may be
worth trying the fully proprietary one.
```
